README.md, before:

# Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Fonts

### Consonants
![alt text][consonants]

[consonants]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-con.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Consonants"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


### Vowels
![alt text][vowels]

[vowels]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-vow.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Vowels"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


### Tones
![alt text][tones]

[tones]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-ton.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Tones"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


### Noun Indicators
![alt text][noun-indicators]

[noun-indicators]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-extra.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Noun Indicators"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


### Numerals
![alt text][numerals]

[numerals]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-num.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Noun Numerals"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


## History
The first known font creation of the Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Fonts started in May 1, 1993. Though the script conceptualization started many years ago in the 1980s by Reverend Cher Vang Kong. He was tasked by General Vang Pao during their meeting in Santa Ana, CA to try and develop the Hmong language and script for the Hmong language use. It was known during the time that the Hmong RPA written system was a script that was not sufficient for future Hmong language development and was not able to fully capture the whole Hmong language. The Hmong RPA system was popularly attributed to Dr. William Smalley, Dr. George Linwood Barney, and Father Yves Bertrais (also popularly known as Txiv Plig Nyiaj Pov).

After several years of research all over Laos, Thailand, and even in China where the Hmong people known to have lived in History, Reverend Cher Vang Kong began developing the script that he was tasked in the early 1980s. Several years after, General Vang Pao, along with other Hmong leaders, gathered to meet and discuss the progress of the tasks and action items that were assigned.

<!---After Reverend Cher Vang Kong had reported his research and development of the new script, General Vang Pao had disregarded his work and imprudently stated that General Vang Pao had already submitted a different Hmong script to the United Nations official language department (This may have been due to the wider prejudice feelings in the Hmong community towards the Hmong who have converted to Christianity). --->

Afterwards, the development and progress of the scripts became more in use in the church that Reverend Cher Vang Kong had founded, United Christians Liberty Evangelical Church. The script had been implemented into type writers, hymnals, videos, books, banners, teaching/educational materials, and many others. The script spreaded rapidly in the late 1980s and early 1990s within the churches and started to become more well-known and exposed outside of the church to the Hmong community and even outside of the United States. Some materials and books written in Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong can still be found outside of the United States such as France, Laos, Thailand, Vietnam, China and Australia.

## Font Creation Approximate Dates
MONG_CN.TTF - May 1, 1993  
MONG_HE.TTF - May 1, 1993  
MONG_HT.TTF - May 1, 1993  
MONG_NEW.TTF - December 5, 1993  
MONG.TTF - March 3, 1994  
WCLMONG1.TTF - March 31, 1995  
WCLMONG2.TTF - April 11, 1995  
MONG1_10.TTF - January 23, 2010 
![](screenshots/screenshot.png)


MongBitmap.ttf - September 8, 2020
![](screenshots/MongBitmap.png)

## Today
Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong script has been submitted and approved in the Unicode Technical Committee meeting 151 on May 8, 2017 in San Jose, CA.

October 18, 2017 - The New York Times Magazine briefly mentioned about Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong [here](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/18/magazine/how-the-appetite-for-emojis-complicates-the-effort-to-standardize-the-worlds-alphabets.html?smid=fb-share).

November 16, 2017 - A video by Founder of Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong script, Rev. Chervang Vang, explaining the inspiration behind the Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong scripts.

March 5, 2019 - Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Script has been published onto Unicode Version 12.0.0. [here](http://unicode.org/versions/Unicode12.0.0/).

October 15, 2020 - Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Script Committee has been invited to speak about the Digitization and Language Sustainability at the internationalization & Unicode Conference 44 held Virtually from October 14-16, 2020. [here](https://www.unicodeconference.org/bios.htm#Lee).

[![Pipulate YouTube Playlist](https://i.ytimg.com/vi_webp/kPy4Vi3M398/hqdefault.webp)](https://youtu.be/kPy4Vi3M398)

*Video Spoken in Hmong, English subtitles will be provided soon.*

## Resources & Links
You can learn more about the Script [here](http://skyknowledge.com/mong-ntaub3.htm).  
You can see the Unicode Script proposal [here](http://www.unicode.org/L2/L2017/17002r3-n4780r3-nyiakeng-puachue-hmong.pdf).  
You can also see the Unicode Status [here](http://scriptsource.org/cms/scripts/page.php?item_id=entry_detail&uid=f6vf3vzlls).  

You can learn more about United Christians Liberty Evangelical Church [here](https://www.ucleministry.org/).  
You can also learn more about Reverend Cher Vang Kong and his biography through his book [here](https://www.amazon.com/Finding-God-Cher-Vang-Kong/dp/1498442668).  

We are continually updating the status of the Unicode Script Submission and its implementation.

Commit message:

Added New Link in Resources
Added a new link to the Mhong International Language Center organization. The central organization of learning Mhong language and the Nyiakeng Puachue Mhong script.

README.md, after:

# Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Fonts

### Consonants
![alt text][consonants]

[consonants]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-con.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Consonants"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


### Vowels
![alt text][vowels]

[vowels]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-vow.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Vowels"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


### Tones
![alt text][tones]

[tones]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-ton.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Tones"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


### Noun Indicators
![alt text][noun-indicators]

[noun-indicators]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-extra.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Noun Indicators"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


### Numerals
![alt text][numerals]

[numerals]: http://skyknowledge.com/TxawjVag-num.gif "Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Noun Numerals"  
Photo by *Ian James & Mattias Persson/Sky Knowledge*


## History
The first known font creation of the Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Fonts started in May 1, 1993. Though the script conceptualization started many years ago in the 1980s by Reverend Cher Vang Kong. He was tasked by General Vang Pao during their meeting in Santa Ana, CA to try and develop the Hmong language and script for the Hmong language use. It was known during the time that the Hmong RPA written system was a script that was not sufficient for future Hmong language development and was not able to fully capture the whole Hmong language. The Hmong RPA system was popularly attributed to Dr. William Smalley, Dr. George Linwood Barney, and Father Yves Bertrais (also popularly known as Txiv Plig Nyiaj Pov).

After several years of research all over Laos, Thailand, and even in China where the Hmong people known to have lived in History, Reverend Cher Vang Kong began developing the script that he was tasked in the early 1980s. Several years after, General Vang Pao, along with other Hmong leaders, gathered to meet and discuss the progress of the tasks and action items that were assigned.

<!---After Reverend Cher Vang Kong had reported his research and development of the new script, General Vang Pao had disregarded his work and imprudently stated that General Vang Pao had already submitted a different Hmong script to the United Nations official language department (This may have been due to the wider prejudice feelings in the Hmong community towards the Hmong who have converted to Christianity). --->

Afterwards, the development and progress of the scripts became more in use in the church that Reverend Cher Vang Kong had founded, United Christians Liberty Evangelical Church. The script had been implemented into type writers, hymnals, videos, books, banners, teaching/educational materials, and many others. The script spreaded rapidly in the late 1980s and early 1990s within the churches and started to become more well-known and exposed outside of the church to the Hmong community and even outside of the United States. Some materials and books written in Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong can still be found outside of the United States such as France, Laos, Thailand, Vietnam, China and Australia.

## Font Creation Approximate Dates
MONG_CN.TTF - May 1, 1993  
MONG_HE.TTF - May 1, 1993  
MONG_HT.TTF - May 1, 1993  
MONG_NEW.TTF - December 5, 1993  
MONG.TTF - March 3, 1994  
WCLMONG1.TTF - March 31, 1995  
WCLMONG2.TTF - April 11, 1995  
MONG1_10.TTF - January 23, 2010 
![](screenshots/screenshot.png)


MongBitmap.ttf - September 8, 2020
![](screenshots/MongBitmap.png)

## Today
Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong script has been submitted and approved in the Unicode Technical Committee meeting 151 on May 8, 2017 in San Jose, CA.

October 18, 2017 - The New York Times Magazine briefly mentioned about Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong [here](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/18/magazine/how-the-appetite-for-emojis-complicates-the-effort-to-standardize-the-worlds-alphabets.html?smid=fb-share).

November 16, 2017 - A video by Founder of Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong script, Rev. Chervang Vang, explaining the inspiration behind the Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong scripts.

March 5, 2019 - Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Script has been published onto Unicode Version 12.0.0. [here](http://unicode.org/versions/Unicode12.0.0/).

October 15, 2020 - Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Script Committee has been invited to speak about the Digitization and Language Sustainability at the internationalization & Unicode Conference 44 held Virtually from October 14-16, 2020. [here](https://www.unicodeconference.org/bios.htm#Lee).

[![Pipulate YouTube Playlist](https://i.ytimg.com/vi_webp/kPy4Vi3M398/hqdefault.webp)](https://youtu.be/kPy4Vi3M398)

*Video Spoken in Hmong, English subtitles will be provided soon.*

## Resources & Links
You can learn about Mhong International Language Center [here](https://www.mhongilc.org).
You can learn more about the Script [here](http://skyknowledge.com/mong-ntaub3.htm).  
You can see the Unicode Script proposal [here](http://www.unicode.org/L2/L2017/17002r3-n4780r3-nyiakeng-puachue-hmong.pdf).  
You can also see the Unicode Status [here](http://scriptsource.org/cms/scripts/page.php?item_id=entry_detail&uid=f6vf3vzlls).  

You can learn more about United Christians Liberty Evangelical Church [here](https://www.ucleministry.org/).  
You can also learn more about Reverend Cher Vang Kong and his biography through his book [here](https://www.amazon.com/Finding-God-Cher-Vang-Kong/dp/1498442668).  

We are continually updating the status of the Unicode Script Submission and its implementation.
